---
layout: post
title:  "Achieving infinity in C"
author: Elis Staaf
date:   2025-01-22 18:34:34 +0100
categories: ramblings
---

Infinity. It is... Certainly a uhh *not* number. Ahh, this is getting
akward. Okay, onwards to my main point. *Why is it so hard to program
infinity?*. I've been meaning to find this out, and I'll explain why.

## *"Why do you care?"*
I've been making this little [operating system](https://github.com/ElisStaaf/pearlOS)
for a few months. It's fun, but one thing that isn't fun about it is
making the standard libraries. It's very difficult to recreate these
library functions in pure C, but it is possible! Except for one.
``INFINITY``. The macro from the math library defining... Well,
infinity. But it's never been achieved by me. I've been using
``~(1<<33)`` as a placeholder for a while but now I *actually*
want to find out.

## *"How do you achieve it?"*
Well, we could begin by looking at the standard library's
definition of "INFINITY":

{% highlight c %}
// HUGE_VALF definition:
// # if __GNUC_PREREQ (3, 3)
// #  define HUGE_VALF (__builtin_huge_valf ())
// #  define HUGE_VALL (__builtin_huge_vall ())
// # else
// #  define HUGE_VALF 1e10000f
// #  define HUGE_VALL 1e10000L
// # endif

# if __GNUC_PREREQ (3, 3)
#  define INFINITY (__builtin_inff ())
# else
#  define INFINITY HUGE_VALF
# endif
{% endhighlight %}

There are *two* paths we can go down here. We can assume that
``GNUC_PREREQ == (3, 3)`` and that it's not. Let's assume
that it's not first (because that's the shorter path)
and then that it is. So, our ``GNUC_PREREQ`` is not equal
to ``(3, 3)``. Now, infinity becomes ``HUGE_VALF`` and
the value of ``HUGE_VALF`` is ``1e10000f``. Simple as
that. We can simply define our ``INF``
macro as this:

{% highlight c %}
#define INF 1e10000f
{% endhighlight %}

We're done! But what if it is? What if ``GNUC_PREREQ``
is equal to ``(3, 3)``, I mean. Now, ``INFINITY`` suddenly
transforms into some LAME builtin (``__builtin_inff``).
Using this, is it still possible to achieve
infinity? Don't know, but let's try anyways!

#### *"Why not just ``__builtin_inff``?"*
Because I'm not scared. I refuse to use the standard
library functions if something else is possible. I do
simply refuse.

#### *"``-1`` has to work, right?"*
Not really. Sometimes, if your only handling positive
values, some idiot might say that you should use ``-1``
as a replacement for ``INFINITY``, as you can not
compare with it. Idiotic.

#### *"Try ``x+1``!"*
``x+1`` is a more unpopular answer, but stupid nonetheless.
I mean, you could compare against it but it doesn't really
work in practice. See this code:

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>

#define INF(x) (x+1)

int main() {
    int x = 512;
    if (x > INF(x)) {
        printf("This is impossible, idiots!\n");
    } else {
        printf("This will always happen.\n");
    }
    int y = -512;
    if (y > INF(y)) {
        printf("And this is where th%e problems start to arise.\n");
    } else {
        printf("This code is really ugly.\n");
    }
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This code is really ugly. Comparing ``x`` against a macro with
parameter ``x``. I don't want ugly code, I'd rather use ``~(1<<33)``.

#### *"``x/0`` has to work!"*
Well then, know-it-all, let's try it:

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>

double div(double d1, double d2) { return d1 / d2; }

#define INF div(3, 0)

int main() {
  printf("%d\n", INF);
  return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Wait... This program compiles! O-okay, let's check it out:

{% highlight sh %}
gcc -o inf inf.c
./inf
{% endhighlight %}

Output:

{% highlight cpp %}
inf
{% endhighlight %}

YES! YES YES YES! IT WORKS! WORKS! WOHOO! Well, that's how
you do it! You uhh divide by zero. Well, okay, I'll be seeing
you after fixing my operating system. Buh-byte! See what I did there?
Cool eh? Eh?
